JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We will defeat radical Islamic
terrorism and
we will not allow it to take
root in our country.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
addresses troops
as his immigration ban faces
court challenges.
Then, our Politics Monday team
takes a look
at the inner workings of the
Trump White House.
Also ahead: taking the
temperature of an experimental
program under the Affordable
Care Act aimed
at keeping costs down by
changing the way
hospitals deliver care.
DR.
TIMOTHY FERRIS, Manager,
Partners HealthCare:
It allows us essentially to
customize the
delivery of services to the
specific needs
and not base how we are
delivering that service
on exactly what is paid for in
the fee-for-service
system.
JOHN YANG: And a record-setting
win.
The Patriots score the biggest
comeback in
Super Bowl history.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: A federal appeals
court in California
is the focus tonight in the
legal war over
banning travelers from seven
mostly Muslim
nations.
The flow resumed over the
weekend, and today
the president again defended his
order.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, a
continued current
of arrivals like this one at
Dulles Airport
outside of Washington, families
previously
denied entry under President
Trump's travel
order now met with applause,
some due to the
weekend's court orders, others
like brothers
Tareq and Ammar Aziz from Yemen
because they
are green card holders who had
to reschedule
after confusion over their
status.
TAREQ AZIZ, Green Card Holder: I
just wanted
to thank all of the people who
support us,
who were with us.
They made me feel like there's a
family here,
that we have a family.
And that's what I love about
America.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this
following Friday's
ruling by federal Judge James
Robart in Seattle
that halted several key
provisions, at least
temporarily.
That ruling drew a tweetstorm of
criticism
from the president.
"If something happens," Mr.
Trump wrote, "blame
him and the court system."
He had more to say today at
MacDill Air Force
Base in Tampa, Florida.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We need strong programs, so that
people that
love us and want to love our
country and will
end up loving our country are
allowed in,
not people that want to destroy
us and destroy
our country.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: It was his
first visit to
U.S. Central Command, the
military wing overseeing
the Middle East.
As he spoke about radical
Islamic terror attacks,
Mr. Trump's sharpest criticism
was about the
media.
DONALD TRUMP: It's gotten to a
point where
it's not even being reported,
and in many
cases the very, very dishonest
press doesn't
want to report it.
They have their reasons, and you
understand
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: We asked the
White House
for specific examples of
unreported terror
attacks and didn't receive a
response.
Meantime, Vice President Pence
defended the
president's words about the
Seattle judge
over the weekend on ABC.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
And the president is determined
to use the
authority that he has under the
Constitution
and under the law.
LISA DESJARDINS: The legal
battle has moved
fast.
The Justice Department asked a
federal appeals
court over the weekend to
reconsider Judge
Robart's action, saying it harms
the public
by thwarting enforcement, and
second-guesses
the president's national
security judgment.
But the attorneys general of
Washington State
and Minnesota who pushed for the
original
halt to the order responded back
strongly.
"Unfreezing it," they told the
appeals court,
"would unleash chaos, and would,
once again,
separate families and strand
university students
and faculty."
Major tech firms, including
Uber, Apple and
Google, filed their own briefs
against the
travel ban, saying it will hurt
their work
forces and the economy.
And former Secretaries of State
John Kerry
and Madeleine Albright also
filed briefs,
saying the ban will harm
counterterrorism
partnerships with other nations.
Late today, President Trump
returned to Washington,
as the appeals court mulled its
decision.
And staff here at the White
House just confirmed
to me what many people are
thinking, that
this whole fight over the travel
ban could
end up at the U.S. Supreme Court
-- John.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, we heard
President Trump
talking about this court case
involving his
immigration order.
What are the officials at the
White House
saying?
LISA DESJARDINS: I just came
back from talking
to Assistant Press Secretary
Michael Short.
He stressed two things.
One, this is temporary, that the
administration
is working on more permanent
actions that
may not be executive orders, but
may be just
new forms of vetting.
Second, he talked about a real
fear that the
White House has.
He even used these words.
He said: "I would hate to be
explaining a
terror attack that could have
been prevented
by our actions."
However, at the same time, John,
we now have
word that 16 Democratic state
attorneys general
feel the opposite.
They feel the real threat is
from this order.
And they have filed supportive
briefs to those
attorneys generals who are
fighting it.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, I
understand you have
gotten a little later word from
the White
House about this claim of
reported terrorist
attacks?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
On the plane back from Florida,
White House
Press Secretary Sean Spicer told
reporters
who were there that what the
president was
talking about was
under-reporting of terror
plots.
We pressed that here at the
White House a
bit more.
And I was told that the White
House is coming
up with a list.
Of course, the president himself
didn't use
the word under-reported.
He said not even being reported.
We're waiting to see what list
they come up
with.
We haven't seen that list yet.
JOHN YANG: Lisa Desjardins on
the White House
North Lawn.
In the day's other news: The
Senate went into
an around-the-clock session in a
showdown
over Betsy DeVos, President
Trump's nominee
to be education secretary.
She's a wealthy Republican donor
and champion
of alternatives to public
schools.
The Democrats said today they
will hold the
Senate floor until tomorrow's
confirmation
vote.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: She
is the least qualified
nomination in a historically
unqualified Cabinet.
On conflicts of interest, she
ranks among
the worst.
On philosophy of education, her
views are
extreme.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I
have every confidence that Ms.
DeVos will
lead the Department of Education
in such a
way that will put our students'
interests
first while also strengthening
the educational
opportunities available to all
of America's
children.
JOHN YANG: Tomorrow's Senate
roll call could
come down to a tie.
That would leave Vice President
Pence to cast
the deciding vote, something no
other vice
president has ever done in a
Cabinet confirmation.
Senior Republicans are brushing
aside President
Trump's latest remarks on
Russian President
Vladimir Putin.
In a FOX News interview that
aired Sunday,
he dismissed Bill O'Reilly's
characterization
of Putin as a killer.
The president said: "There are a
lot of killers."
And he asked, "Our country's so
innocent?"
Today, Texas Congressman Mac
Thornberry, chairman
of the House Armed Services
Committee, rejected
the comparison.
He said: "Are we the same as
Putin's Russia?
The answer is no."
In Afghanistan, bad weather and
snow-blocked
roads are hampering rescue
efforts after avalanches
killed at least 119 people over
the weekend.
Nearly 90 more were hurt.
Workers are trying to reach
remote villages
in the northern part of the
country, where
nearly 200 homes have been
destroyed.
Officials say some places were
buried under
more than six feet of snow.
The one-time presidential
front-runner in
France insisted tonight he will
not drop out
of the race despite an
embezzlement scandal.
Conservative Francois Fillon has
plunged in
the polls, opening the door to
far-right leader
Marine Le Pen, who echoes
President Trump's
populism.
This evening, Fillon defended
himself against
claims that he put relatives in
high-paying
government jobs with no real
duties.
FRANCOIS FILLON, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator): What was
acceptable
yesterday isn't anymore today.
By working with my wife and my
children, I
favored this collaboration of
trust which
today creates distrust.
It was a mistake.
JOHN YANG: The first round of
voting in the
French election will be in
April.
Ahead of the balloting, Facebook
and Google
are teaming up with French news
organizations
to tackle fake news.
The companies say they will
provide tools
to 17 French newsrooms to help
them identify
and debunk false stories.
Facebook was criticized for not
preventing
false information from being
republished during
the American presidential
election.
Wall Street opened the week on a
quiet note.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 19 points
to close at 20052.
The Nasdaq fell three points,
and the S&P
500 slipped nearly five.
And Boston is getting ready for
a blowout
celebration after New England's
dramatic overtime
win over Atlanta in the Super
Bowl.
The Patriots returned home this
afternoon
after coming from 25 points
behind last night
to win 34-28.
It's their fifth NFL title.
The city holds a parade
tomorrow.
We will take a closer look at a
game for the
ages later in the program.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
legal arguments
for and against the immigration
ban as the
courts weigh in; and it's
Politics Monday,
a look at the inner workings of
the White
House; and much more.
Now to the constitutional
showdown over President
Trump's executive order on
immigration.
For the first of two looks at
what's at stake,
we are joined first by
Washington State Attorney
General Bob Ferguson from
Seattle.
It was his suit that led to this
weekend's
temporary shutdown of the ban.
Attorney General Ferguson,
thanks for joining
us.
BOB FERGUSON, Washington State
Attorney General:
Thanks for having me on.
JOHN YANG: If you -- if the
court lifts this
ban, lifts the temporary
restraining order,
will you appeal to the Supreme
Court?
BOB FERGUSON: Well, to be
crystal clear, I
will use every tool I have to
make sure that
this unconstitutional executive
order doesn't
stand.
That said, we're confident the
Ninth Circuit
will affirm what Judge Robart,
who was appointed,
of course, by President George
W. Bush, will
affirm his decision to grant
that TRO.
JOHN YANG: I assume you're
anticipating if
he does keep it in place that
the Justice
Department will take it to the
Supreme Court.
What's your sense of how your
chances would
fare on the current court?
BOB FERGUSON: Well, I feel very
confident.
As I mentioned, Judge Robart is
a very serious,
well-respected judge appointed
by President
George W. Bush.
And he took the significant step
of granting
a temporary restraining order.
There's a high hurdle for a
lawyer to meet
in a courtroom to get a judge to
grant a TRO,
a temporary restraining order.
So, given that and the fact the
Ninth Circuit
declined to give an emergency
stay a couple
nights ago, we feel confident
with our case
not just at the Ninth Circuit,
but frankly
all the way up to the U.S.
Supreme Court,
if that's what it comes down to.
JOHN YANG: And all this is right
now is just
over this temporary restraining
order.
You would still have to go back
for a trial
on the merits before Judge
Robart in Seattle,
is that right?
BOB FERGUSON: That's correct,
although we
feel confident there, because in
order to
grant the temporary restraining
order, one
of the criteria that the judge
must conclude
is that the state has a high
likelihood of
prevailing on the merits.
He's already reached that
conclusion that
we're likely to prevail once we
get to the
merits before the judge.
JOHN YANG: Now, the Constitution
gives the
president authority to deal with
immigration,
to conduct foreign affairs and
address immigration.
Congress in the immigration law
gives the
president the power to restrict
or suspend
the entry of people he may deem
appropriate.
Why do you argue that this is
unconstitutional?
BOB FERGUSON: Well, it's pretty
straightforward.
Yes, the president has broad
authority.
We don't question that.
But what the federal government
is literally
arguing, and that your viewers
should be aware
of, is they're arguing that it's
unfettered,
that the court cannot look
behind any motivation
for that order or whether or not
it's constitutional.
And that has never been the law
and simply
cannot be the law.
And we are a nation of laws.
And nobody can ignore our
Constitution.
No one's above the law.
And that includes the president
of the United
States.
JOHN YANG: If this executive
order had just
called for the extreme vetting,
as President
Trump calls it, and not
specified countries,
not given preference to
Christians -- well,
it gives preference to religious
minorities
in these countries, which means
Christians
and other religions -- would
that have removed
the constitutional objections,
in your view?
BOB FERGUSON: Well, I'm often
asked about
different permutations that
might solve the
significant problem the federal
government
has.
What I can say is, there is
pretty significant
vetting going on.
I just returned from Sea-Tac
Airport here
in Washington State, where I met
individuals
who had been denied entry to the
country as
a result of the president's
executive order,
but are now back in.
And in one case, he had gone
through a through
a two-year process to get his
visa.
He's now joining his wife, who's
a citizen
of this state, and his cousin,
who is a graduate
of Washington State University
and works at
Boeing.
These are folks who would be
great additions
to our life in Washington State.
And that's happening all across
the country
as well.
JOHN YANG: So, we're learning
that the judge
has asked -- the appeals court
asked for oral
arguments today.
Give us a preview.
What are you going to be saying
before this
three-judge panel?
BOB FERGUSON: So, you have news
that I just
am hearing for the first time.
So, we're not surprised if
there's oral argument.
We anticipated that would be the
case for
an issue of this magnitude.
And we will make the same case,
frankly, that
we made before Judge Robart,
that there can
be no unfettered discretion for
a president,
that you have to look behind
what he's doing
here, and that we find in this
case that it
violates various constitutional
provisions,
and also violates specific
statutory provisions
as well.
So we're confident we will
prevail.
JOHN YANG: The president has
been tweeting
about this.
He said that this stay, this
temporary restraining
order, puts our country in such
peril, he
says.
If something happens, blame him,
meaning the
judge, Judge Robart, and the
court system.
How do you respond to that?
BOB FERGUSON: Well, look, a
couple things.
Number one, as a lawyer, his
comments about
the judge being a so-called
judge, for example,
or statements like that are
deeply concerning
to anyone who cares about our
judiciary.
Number two, my wife and I, we
are raising
our twins, our young twins, to
be gracious
in victory or defeat.
And President Trump is obviously
having a
very difficult time handling the
defeat that
he suffered before a federal
district court
judge.
JOHN YANG: What about his
underlying argument,
though, that this is allowing,
this could
allow a terrorist to come into
the country?
BOB FERGUSON: What did I would
encourage the
president to do is to draft an
executive order
that's constitutional.
That's his job.
That's his responsibility.
My job and my responsibility is
to make sure
that everybody, including the
president, plays
by the rules and follows the
Constitution.
And in a courtroom, it is not
the loudest
voice that prevails.
It's the Constitution.
And that's why I think we're
prevailing right
now.
JOHN YANG: Attorney General Bob
Ferguson from
Seattle, thank you very much.
BOB FERGUSON: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: And now for a
different take on
President Trump's executive
order, Republican
Congressman Ted Yoho of Florida
joins us from
Capitol Hill.
Mr. Yoho, thanks for being with
us.
I don't know.
I hope you were able to hear the
attorney
general from Washington.
REP.
TED YOHO (R), Florida: Yes, I
was.
Yes.
JOHN YANG: What do you say to
him?
He says this violates both the
Constitution
and immigration law.
What do you say to that?
REP.
TED YOHO: I disagree with that.
I think the president -- the
executive, regardless
who it is, has the ability to
decide who comes
in and doesn't if it's a
national security
risk.
And all he's asking -- I have
read the executive
order -- all he's asking is put
a pause on
it so that we get the metrics
right, so that
we can do the background checks
correct.
I don't see a problem with that.
And he's got in there where you
come back
in 30 days, reassess it, 60, 90,
and 120 days.
This is a pause.
This is not a ban, complete ban.
It is a pause.
And I think anybody that is
concerned with
national security, and if you
look at our
Constitution -- he kept talking
about being
Constitution -- the Constitution
states very
clearly that the number one task
of our government
is to provide for the common
defense and protection
of this country.
And I think, when you look
around the world,
other areas that have not done
this, I think
they're wishing they would have
been a little
bit more stringent in the
examination of people
coming in, in the refugee
program.
You know, look at Belgium, look
at Paris,
look at Germany.
And I think this is a time that
we have to
do that.
And it's -- again, it's a
temporary pause.
And people, I think, just need
to calm down,
let us work through the process.
The courts will work this out.
But I think it's also good that
it brought
to light how we have to fix our
immigration
policy.
So I welcome that, too.
JOHN YANG: And the opponents of
this are also
arguing that -- in their court
challenge,
that this creates -- even this
ban, this temporary
-- temporary pause, as you call
it, as you
say, would create immediate and
irreparable
injury, in employment,
education, business,
family relations and freedom to
travel.
How do you respond to that?
REP.
TED YOHO: You know, I think
those are talking
points that people are throwing
out there.
There is going to be some
inconvenience.
But how inconvenient was 9/11?
How inconvenient were the
attacks in Belgium
and Brussels?
Those were extreme consequences
that came
from not vetting people
properly.
We don't want to make that
mistake.
Would you rather make the
mistake and err
on the side of caution or wait
until something
happens and then answer to the
American people,
why you didn't vet these people
properly?
JOHN YANG: In the last Congress,
you were
on the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee
on Terrorism.
Are these countries, the
countries that are
specified in the executive
order, given your
experience on that panel, are
these the countries
you would have chosen?
REP.
TED YOHO: I think these are good
countries
to put on there.
You look at Syria, you look at
Somalia, you
look at these other ones, they
don't have
the infrastructure or the I.T.
to go back
and look at somebody's birth
record, their
history, their work records.
You look at other countries, and
we hear,
well, Saudi Arabia is not on,
and that's where
the 9/11 terrorists came from,
or the majority
of them.
We have sat down with Saudi
Arabia, the UAE.
In Egypt, they have good
technology.
They have good I.T. systems
where we can do
these background checks.
In fact, they have beefed that
up since then.
And so we feel comfortable with
there.
But look at Syria.
It's a nation ravaged with war
that they can't
go back and look at these
records, or Somalia.
You can't go in there in a
country like that.
Then you look at the people that
have infiltrated
the refugee programs.
We know they're using fake
passports.
We know countries that are
complicit making
fake passports.
And so let's get this right.
Let's let people calm down and
make sure that
we go through the vetting
process, and then
we will get through this.
JOHN YANG: If the courts were to
block this
for longer or even maybe strike
it down, is
there a congressional fix for
this?
REP.
TED YOHO: Yes.
Sure.
It's going through and doing
legislation,
passing it in the House and the
Senate, and
the president will sign it.
And these are things that will
be stimulated.
This is a catalyst that tells us
that we should
go ahead and get these processes
done.
So, yes, for sure.
JOHN YANG: And let me ask you
about President
Trump's tweets.
I know you were elected as a
member of the
Tea Party.
You believe in the Constitution
and the three
branches of government.
REP.
TED YOHO: Absolutely.
JOHN YANG: What do you think of
him saying
-- calling this judge a
so-called judge and
saying, if something happens,
blame him?
REP.
TED YOHO: Well, you know, Mr.
Trump has his
own style, his own technique,
his own uniqueness.
It's not something I probably
would have done,
but, again, that's the way he
has evolved
to this point in his life.
And it's worked well for him.
And I expect you're going to see
more of that.
That's a minor thing compared to
what he's
trying to do.
He's putting national security
in front, where
it needs to be.
And we have had such a lapsed
process over
the last probably 15 years, that
it's time
that somebody stands up and does
that.
And when you do that, when you
have the leadership
and the strength to do that,
people get upset.
And it just takes somebody
willing to stand
up and take the arrows for that.
And, again, it's a pause.
It's not a ban.
JOHN YANG: And, also, let me
ask, finally.
You were very critical of
President Obama
for his executive orders, for
going around
Congress.
REP.
TED YOHO: Sure.
JOHN YANG: How is this
different?
Why is this case different, in
your mind?
REP.
TED YOHO: I think the big thing
is, this centers
on national security.
When you look at what President
Obama did
with the executive order
November 20 of 2014,
he was giving a blanket amnesty
to five million
people that came into this
country illegally.
Again, you can't vet that many
people properly.
And you can't use a blanket
order for that.
That's not discretionary review
of those type
of individuals.
President Trump, on the other
side, is standing
up on the -- erring on the side
of caution
on a national security basis
that I think
we all should applaud, that
we're putting
the country first and the
Constitution of
protecting and preserving our
freedoms here.
So, that's where I see a
difference.
And if you look at what
President Obama did,
right before he got out, he
removed wet foot-dry
foot on our Cuban Adjustment
Act.
And nobody said a word about
that, but yet
he did the same thing, and I
applaud him for
doing that.
JOHN YANG: Representative Ted
Yoho, thanks
for joining us.
REP.
TED YOHO: Yes, sir.
Have a good evening.
JOHN YANG: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
elusive Obamacare
promise of better treatment at
lower costs;
plus, a stunning Super Bowl
comeback for the
ages from the New England
Patriots and Tom
Brady.
But first: a look at what we
know about the
inner workings of the Trump
White House and
the at times chaotic rollout of
executive
actions.
We have our Politics Monday team
of Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report.
And, tonight, we're also joined
by Glenn Thrush,
the White House correspondent
for The New
York Times.
Glenn, let me start with you.
You have a not only -- because
you're the
only one of us, I think, who has
been immortalized
on "Saturday Night Live."
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN YANG: So, you had a story
this morning
in The New York Times that had
all sorts of
interesting details on the inner
workings
of the Trump White House.
What struck you as you were
reporting that
story?
GLENN THRUSH, The New York
Times: Well, what
struck me is -- and I will use
this metaphor
-- is that the Trump White
House, this very
small crew of ideologues and
operatives who
are loyal to the president, have
begun carpet-bombing
the world with these executive
orders, insults
and taunts hurled at leaders
around the world,
while they are still essentially
building
the plane.
The point is, there is a
tremendous amount
of audacity and a lot of
boldness coming out
of Stephen Bannon, who is the
president's
chief strategist, who is the
brain behind
what is essentially 250
executive orders that
have been at least looked at,
dozens and dozens
which are likely to be unveiled
over the next
12 months, while the president
is figuring
out how to operate the basic
levers of power
in Washington, D.C.
And my partner and I, Maggie
Haberman, point
out just how fundamental that
is.
When we say operate the levers
of power, we
mean that literally.
There are staffers in the West
Wing of the
White House who don't know how
to operate
the lights yet.
JOHN YANG: Tam, you have done a
little reporting
on this in terms of the
historical record.
How unusual is this for an
outsider from Washington
coming into the White House like
this to have
this sort of -- it's been
described as chaos
and disorganization?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
you don't have to go back too
far, because
there was an outsider who came
in, in 1993
from Arkansas, brought a bunch
of people from
Arkansas in, and thought that
they didn't
need the people who were experts
and who had
done it all before.
And it was pretty problematic
for about the
first year-and-a-half of the
Clinton administration,
where they had a lot of trouble
getting their
nominees through and similar
hiccups.
So, there is a model for it.
And about a year-and-a-half into
the Clinton
administration, there was sort
of a staff
shakeup and they brought in
somebody with
some more Washington experience,
Leon Panetta,
to be chief of staff.
JOHN YANG: Amy, could this be by
design?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
listen, we saw that Donald Trump
as a candidate,
Donald Trump as a businessman,
his management
style is chaos and conflict, and
it won him
the nomination, and it won him
the White House.
He's been successful in his
business dealings
with this.
So why not use it at the White
House, right?
The question is, how long can
you keep going
like this?
I know a lot of folks come to
Washington saying,
I'm just going to run Washington
like you
run a business.
Well, Washington isn't a
business.
Running the government isn't
like running
a business.
It is big and complicated.
And for the first time in his
life, he's got
a whole bunch of people that not
only answer
to him, but who he has to answer
to, namely
the two other branches of
government that
he's learning right now.
So, will this continue to
happen?
Maybe.
I talked to some folks who say,
you're not
likely to see him change.
But, at the same time, you saw
during the
course of the campaign he would
make course
corrections.
Remember, he went through two
campaign managers
after -- and then finally
landing on Kellyanne
Conway.
So, he could make some changes
when he sees
that the outside pressure is
coming, whether
it's in stories like the one
that Glenn had
this morning or other
frustrations that he's
feeling personally.
JOHN YANG: Glenn, you talked
about them trying
to figure out how to turn the
lights on, but
also in some of the offices
they're trying
to turn the lights on, there
aren't -- there
is no one in there anyway,
right?
GLENN THRUSH: Well, I think, you
know, they
put forth figures.
The chief of staff, Reince
Priebus, says that
they're meeting their staffing
expectations
comparable to what President
Obama had eight
years ago.
The truth of the matter is,
though -- and
I should say we spoke with 40 to
50 people
for this story over the course
of the last
two weeks.
The problem isn't getting names
on a list.
The problem is that the
president of the United
States only likes six to eight
people in his
orbit at any given time.
The most telling image -- and
this is a president,
remember, who's very visual --
is around the
Resolute desk in the office, you
have four
hardback chairs arranged.
That's about the number of
people who have
influence on him on any given
day.
And what a lot of people said to
us was, we
have tried to bring in new
people, but we're
afraid, if they underperform or
if the president
doesn't like him, he will take
it out on us,
and we will lose our seats in
one of those
four chairs.
So, this management style that
worked very
well in Trump Tower, the
question is, as Tamara
put it, is, will he be able to
adjust his
management style which worked in
business
and branding to a much more
complicated job,
probably the most complicated
job on the planet?
JOHN YANG: Glenn, we should
point out that
the president, continuing his
love affair
with your publication, tweeted
out this morning.
He said: "The failing New York
Times writes
total fiction concerning me.
They have gotten it wrong for
two years and
now are making up stories and
sources."
On Air Force One on the way back
from Florida,
Sean Spicer, the press
secretary, called it
literally the epitome of fake
news.
I don't know if you want to
respond to that
or not, but that's what they're
saying about
your reporting.
GLENN THRUSH: Our reporting, I
think, is substantial,
and solid and well-sourced.
And every detail in -- major
detail in that
story was run by officials in
the Trump White
House before it was published.
JOHN YANG: Tamara, you have also
looked at
the record on getting Cabinet
nominees in
place and also the sub-Cabinet
officials.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
And there are about 700
important positions
that require Senate
confirmation.
At this point, the Trump
administration has
named about 35 people of those
700.
Now, many administrations take a
while to
name some of the sub-Cabinet,
but, at this
point -- in part, this is
because of the Senate
and Senate Democrats, and, in
part, it's because
of the types of nominees that
were picked
and because of the fact that
they weren't
pre-vetted by the Office of
Government Ethics
before their names were
announced.
But in terms of the Cabinet,
Donald Trump
has the fewest Cabinet members
confirmed of
anyone going back to World War
II.
There's no precedent for a
president this
far in having so few people.
As one person I talked to said,
you're going
into the Super Bowl and you
don't have the
team on the field.
AMY WALTER: And, remember, too,
nobody thought
he was going to win, OK,
including people
in the campaign.
I was talking to -- I'm sure all
of us were
talking to people within Clinton
orbit who
were coming into town looking
for houses from
around the country, thinking,
well, I'm certainly
going to get a job in the
administration,
I have been promised a job in
the administration.
That was all set to go.
So, I think that's a big piece
of it.
And as Tamara pointed out, too,
he's got people,
at least at the Cabinet level,
lined up.
Getting them through the
process, which we're
now having another night where
we're going
to have an all-nighter on the
Senate with
Democrats trying desperately to
block Betsy
DeVos, hoping for one more
Republican vote
to sink her nomination.
TAMARA KEITH: And there are
three Cabinet-level
nominees who have not completed
their ethics
process still.
So, although the Trump
administration complains,
and somewhat rightfully, that
they don't have
enough people on hand, even
though they have
named them, there are three
people who haven't
completed that basic process
that, in the
past, would have been done
before they were
even named.
JOHN YANG: And over the weekend,
we had a
secretary of the Army designee
draw because
of troubles with untangling from
ethics issues.
AMY WALTER: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
JOHN YANG: Amy Walter, Tamara
Keith, Glenn
Thrush, thanks for being with
us.
TAMARA KEITH: Of course.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
GLENN THRUSH: Great to be here.
JOHN YANG: Most of the focus on
the Affordable
Care Act has been on coverage.
But among the goals of the
2,000-page law
is to develop something called
Accountable
Care Organizations.
They offer doctors and hospitals
a deal.
In exchange for better and more
efficient
care for Medicare recipients,
the providers
get a share of the savings.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports.
JACKIE JUDD: Creating health
care for the
future sometimes means going
back to the past.
Nurse practitioner Dana Sheer
makes old-fashioned
house calls to high-risk
patients, like Howard
VanVleck, who suffers from a
neurological
disorder.
On this day, a cough alarmed his
wife.
LISA VANVLECK, Wife of Howard:
When I called
the doctor's office about it,
they said, can
you bring him in?
And I said, really not.
JACKIE JUDD: This visit was
low-tech and quick,
but, if needed, VanVleck can get
an in-home
ultrasound, an EKG, even a chest
X-ray.
DANA SHEER, Nurse Practitioner:
Our program
is really aimed at trying to
figure out ways
that we can provide really good,
cost-effective,
quality care at a patient's
home, at a place
where they can actually thrive
and do better.
JACKIE JUDD: How many times
during that year
would he have been in the
hospital if you
or a colleague hadn't visited?
DANA SHEER: Likely every time.
JACKIE JUDD: Sheer is part of
the Accountable
Care Organization, or ACO, run
by Partners
HealthCare, which collaborates
with several
Massachusetts hospitals.
At Mass General, Jason Wasfy
does the once
unthinkable for a cardiologist.
He routinely e-mails or
video-chats with patients.
DR.
JASON WASFY, Massachusetts
General Hospital:
There are cases, high
cholesterol, for example,
where I don't Actually need to
actually physically
examine the patient.
JACKIE JUDD: Medicare is not
going to reimburse
Partners for the home visit or
the teleconference.
They are not covered services,
so why invest
in these programs?
Because, if they lead to lower
costs to the
government and better care,
Partners may earn
end-of-year bonuses from
Medicare.
DR.
TIMOTHY FERRIS, MDNM /Manager,
Partners
HealthCare: How are you doing
today?
JACKIE JUDD: Primary care
physician Tim Ferris
manages the ACO.
DR.
TIMOTHY FERRIS: It allows us
essentially to
customize the delivery of
services to specific
needs and not base how we are
delivering that
service on exactly what is paid
for in a fee-for-service
system.
JACKIE JUDD: An early concern
about ACOs was,
would doctors skimp on care in
order to save
money?
So far, there is no evidence of
that happening.
WOMAN: This is triggering her
anxiety again.
JACKIE JUDD: At Partners, it has
created 26
new programs since launching its
organization,
everything from integrating
mental health
services with primary care to
offering diabetes
classes.
MAN: I think we will start with
the data on
the front page here.
JACKIE JUDD: Teams of primary
care physicians,
nurses and psychologists meet
weekly to coordinate
care.
WOMAN: We have to do better.
I mean, 81 percent is good,
but...
MAN: It's not good enough.
WOMAN: It's not good enough.
JACKIE JUDD: Without much
fanfare, Accountable
Care Organizations have become
embedded in
the health care system.
While the government
jump-started the movement,
private insurers are also
involved.
In 2012, eight million Americans
got their
care through an ACO.
Today, that number is 31
million.
That's 10 percent of the
population.
The new administration has not
weighed in
on the fate of government-run
ACOs.
Many experts believe they will
remain in place.
DR.
TIMOTHY FERRIS: We are committed
to this journey,
regardless of what happens, that
we have built
sufficient confidence that this
is the right
thing to do for our patients.
JACKIE JUDD: Partners is a major
player among
the nearly 900 ACOs across the
country.
And its size helps cushion the
costs of ramping
up and maintaining its
organization.
Dr. Peter Slavin runs mass
general.
DR.
PETER SLAVIN, President,
Massachusetts General
Hospital: Where we stand to gain
financially
is, we have now freed up
capacity within the
hospital that the ACO patients
used to utilize,
and we can use that capacity to
serve patients
from other networks, from other
parts of the
country, from other parts of the
world.
JACKIE JUDD: Patients who would
be paying
more for your services?
DR.
PETER SLAVIN: Patients who would
be paying
more for our services.
That is correct.
JACKIE JUDD: So, what is
Partners' track record?
Mixed.
Most quality measures have
improved to varying
degrees.
Hospital admissions dropped last
year by 6
percent over the previous year.
The way care is delivered has
been transformed.
Cost, though, is stuck in
neutral.
Partners earned bonuses two
times by spending
less than expected.
But the other two years, it
didn't qualify
for bonuses and it had to absorb
the expenses
of those unreimbursed services.
Partners' record mirrors the
national trend
in ACOs.
The result is Medicare has saved
only a modest
amount of money.
Ashish Jha, a doctor and health
policy researcher
at Harvard, was an early
supporter of ACOs
and he still is.
But he also is questioning
whether early expectations
for dramatic cost savings and
quality improvements
will ever be met.
ASHISH JHA, Harvard School of
Public Health:
I guess I thought by sort of
year four, year
five, we would have started
seeing real gains,
kind of nationally.
And, of course, you would expect
some organizations
to fail, you would expect some
organizations
not to do a good job.
But I -- maybe I was just being
unrealistic.
But when I heard the ACO experts
talking five
years ago, I heard points of,
within a couple
of years, we're going to start
seeing real
movement.
And that hasn't happened.
JACKIE JUDD: Ferris counters
that altering
a complex culture, making big
up-front investments
and reorganizing care take time
and certainly
more than four or five years.
DR.
TIMOTHY FERRIS: You have to
commit to the
long haul here.
And we thought, initially, that
we would be
able to make big changes
quickly.
And it's quite clear that that's
not true.
JACKIE JUDD: According to
government analyses,
primary care ACOs are showing
more success
than the large health systems.
Coastal Medical in Rhode Island
has 85 primary
care doctors.
Since 2012, it has saved
Medicare $24 million
and earned almost half back in
bonuses.
CEO, Dr. Alan Kurose, says not
being linked
to a hospital makes a
difference.
DR.
ALAN KUROSE, CEO, Coastal
Medical: There will
be less demand for inpatient
hospital services
if we really do coordinated
care, patient-centered
care well.
And so that hits the bottom line
of a hospital.
MAN: We're going to start by
just checking
your oxygen level.
JACKIE JUDD: Coastal medical
keeps clinics
open every day of the year, and
some have
late hours.
WOMAN: How is everything going?
JACKIE JUDD: The practice hired
more support
staff, including pharmacists,
physician's
assistants and nurse
practitioners, because
of the time given to the sickest
patients.
ABBE SHUSTER, Nurse Care
Manager: We have
one patient, I call him every
morning just
to make sure he is up for the
day.
I check on how his pain level,
if he's taken
any of his pain meds yet, has
something in
his stomach for the day.
And we have found, by doing
that, that he's
been able to stay in his home
and continue
to get his at-home nursing
services.
JACKIE JUDD: Ironically, many
patients are
not even aware of being part of
an Accountable
Care Organization.
They just know different
services are available.
Brenda Fougera has chronic
medical problems.
BRENDA FOUGERA, Patient: If I
need a same-day
appointment because I have a
cold, because,
with me, with my lungs, they
aren't good.
And Dr. Hubbard would start me
on certain
things where I didn't end up in
the hospital
or end up with pneumonia.
JACKIE JUDD: Even with its early
success,
Coastal Medical and other ACOs
are still searching
for that elusive formula of
better care at
a lower cost.
DR.
ALAN KUROSE: Our experience is
that there
are a lot of smaller buckets of
costs, and
you have to work on a lot of
them.
And you don't need one clinical
initiative.
You need a portfolio of clinical
initiatives.
JACKIE JUDD: Whatever the fate
of Obamacare,
this experiment likely will be
given several
more years to prove whether
personalized,
coordinated care really does in
the end save
large amounts of money.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Jackie Judd
in Boston.
JOHN YANG: More than 110 million
viewers tuned
into the Super Bowl last night.
And a good percentage of them
may have started
tuning out because the game
looked like a
blowout.
But those who looked away missed
an amazing
comeback.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I stayed
with it to the
end.
And I'm glad I did!
And so did Mike Pesca.
He's a sports reporter and the
host of Slate's
daily news and discussion
podcast "The Gist."
Mike, I watched Patriots players
afterwards,
and they were saying, we never
thought it
was over, we always thought we
had a chance.
I'm not sure I believed them.
Did you?
MIKE PESCA, Slate: Yes.
Athletes, that's the mind-set.
And the great ones have it.
And the great ones who play
alongside Tom
Brady with his now five Super
Bowl rings know
that that has to be the
attitude.
And I will have to say that,
going in, it
was the truth that, if Tom Brady
had a chance
to throw without being sacked,
without being
hit, without being hurt, we knew
that he could
a devastating against this
Falcons defense.
He didn't get that chance
through almost three
whole quarters.
Then, when he did get the
chance, the question
is, well, can he slice up this
team in such
a concentrated time period?
And that was the amazing thing.
It's not that Tom Brady
orchestrated fourth-quarter
comebacks.
He has done that six times.
It's that he orchestrated this
25-point comeback
with -- really just starting
with only minutes
to go in the third quarter.
Amazing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
I imagine the background to all
this, the
two years of Deflategate and
Brady suspended
for four games this season.
JEFFREY BROWN: Brady and coach
Belichick,
they said, oh, this stuff wasn't
on our mind.
Clearly on the mind of Robert
Kraft and others.
MIKE PESCA: Well, it was on
Belichick and
Brady's mind, you could tell.
It was on the minds of all the
fans.
And I do think that that Goodell
ruling was
him being a little bit
imperious, imperial,
and making a very harsh ruling.
Tom Brady was suspended for a
quarter of this
season, giving him an extra
incentive, a guy
who doesn't need that.
Now, the background with Kraft
and Goodell
is, Kraft is a big Goodell ally.
And before this got in the way
and soured
their relationship, Goodell
could always count
on Kraft to, among things,
approve gigantic
salaries for Goodell.
So, I don't know if this makes
the Patriots
an underdog, especially given
the politics
of the moment, but to their
fans, this made
this more than just yet another
victory and
the most amazing comeback during
NFL history.
It made it sweet revenge.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so when you
speak, when
you talk of most of all time, of
course, the
inevitable talk is greatest of
all time player
with Brady, coach with
Belichick, and dynasty
with the Patriots.
Where do you come down?
MIKE PESCA: I have never seen
Otto Graham
play a full game.
And most of the people weighing
in haven't
either.
And he has an impeccable record.
Then you have to factor in that
the rules
and the offenses of 2016-2017
are light years
ahead of what guys like Roger
Staubach did.
But no one could -- how could
you say he's
anything less than tied?
And the Brady-Belichick
combination -- the
NFL chews up coaches.
And I think Bill Belichick is
one of the most
creative minds in any endeavor,
finding so
many different ways to win and
outthink the
opponent.
For whatever you think of his
countenance
and not smiling, and perhaps
wearing ill-fitting
hooded sweatshirts, that guy is
a brilliant
thinker, and he brings
creativity to the game,
which I, as a fan, appreciate.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike, just in our
last minute,
I want to ask you about Atlanta.
What an exciting and young team
they were
for about three quarters, and
then what a
devastating loss for the team
and the city
that has hungered for such
things.
MIKE PESCA: Yes.
So, two points.
They were on the field for 93
plays.
No defense could possibly stick
with another
team.
We did think that they had a big
enough buffer.
So, the combination of the
number of plays
the Patriots had, which just
wore down the
defense, and the fact that,
let's be honest,
Atlanta made some terrible
mistakes, including
taking some key sacks and not
kicking a field
goal which would have made it a
three-score
game with four minutes and
change left.
They will be ruing this for a
long time.
And their one Braves
championship back in
the '90s, I don't think will be
enough to
sustain this city for much
longer.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mike Pesca, thank
you very
much.
MIKE PESCA: You're welcome.
JOHN YANG: Now to our latest
"ScienceScope"
episode.
A third of the planet's coral
reef ecosystems
are at risk of being damaged by
warming sea
temperatures and the subsequent
coral bleaching,
but can these creatures adapt
and survive?
"NewsHour"'s science producer
Nsikan Akpan
and producer Matt Ehrichs take
us on a voyage
deep into the Atlantic Ocean,
looking for
answers.
NSIKAN AKPAN: I'm in a plastic
pod in the
middle of the ocean off
Bermuda's southeast
coast.
This thing is smaller than a
Volkswagen Beetle.
As six-foot swells toss our tiny
submersible,
I think, this was a terrible
idea.
Then, suddenly, the pod tips
forward.
The descent begins.
The rocking slowly stops, as the
ocean swallows
us.
All that's left is peace.
No more e-mails.
No claustrophobia.
Just the whole ocean spread in
front of us
and a scientific quest.
"ScienceScope" visited Bermuda
to travel hundreds
of feet underwater with the
privately funded
Nekton mission and to see the
threats harming
more than a third of the
planet's coral reefs,
because some coral may adapt by
going deeper.
MAN: Nekton is a brand-new
project aimed at
exploring and documenting life
in the deep
ocean, but also showing the
public what lives
in the deep ocean, and what it
does for humankind,
and also what impacts humans are
having on
the deep sea.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The project plans
to measure
biodiversity and ocean chemistry
at three
sites in the Atlantic.
The team uses a variety of
tools, among them,
two Triton submersibles called
Nemo and Nomad.
They're the same type used by
filmmaker and
ocean explorer James Cameron.
Capable of diving 1,000 feet,
these minisubs
are equipped with the latest
filming and scientific
equipment.
They will document the vast,
unchartered void
that is the deep sea.
MAN: Well, at present, about
.0001 percent
of the deep sea has been
explored by scientists
like myself.
Our goal is to set up a standard
protocol
for investigating the deep sea.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Over the course of
four hours,
we glide across huge portions of
the seafloor.
This is called a transect.
The scientists videotape and
ultimately identify
as many species as possible.
MAN: On the limestone, we have
coral garden
habitat.
The bright white corals are
hydrocorals.
The yellow corals are
gorgonians, and the
wire corals are black corals.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Oodles of fish
dart back and
forth in this abyss, while moray
eels stick
out their neon green necks from
the sea bed.
But the team can identify
species even when
they're not physically around
using environmental
DNA.
MAN: So, you can imagine if you
put your hand
in a big glass of water, and a
few cells fall
off your hand with your DNA on
them, then
we would be able to take that
water and sequence
it, and find out that you have
been there,
and you have put your hand in
the water.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The scientists
collect water
samples to do the same with
ocean critters,
which shed cells with DNA in
many forms, scales,
shells.
MAN: Poop as well.
(LAUGHTER)
MAN: Poop is a great source of
DNA.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Closer to the
surface, Nekton
conducts similar surveys by
relying on research
divers from Project Baseline, a
global citizen
science initiative.
These divers film the
biodiversity, but also
collect physical specimens for
researchers
like Gretchen Goodbody-Gringley.
She studies how corals migrate
from shallow
water into the deeper, darker
mesophotic zone.
Located 131 to more than 500
feet underwater,
this deeper region may one day
serve as a
refuge for corals affected by
bleaching and
other threats.
GRETCHEN GOODBODY-GRINGLEY, Reef
Ecologist:
Many of the anthropogenic or
human-caused
threats that are impacting
shallow water coral
reefs, such as increases in
seawater temperature,
increases in pollution,
sedimentation and
runoff from the land, these all
impact the
shallow water reef more than
they are impacting
the mesophotic reef.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Warming waters
cause coral bleaching,
as seen here with mushroom
coral.
The coral expels its colorful,
symbiotic algae,
which have become toxic due to
the heat.
This coral also expands to 340
percent of
its size.
If this event occurs too
frequently, the coral
won't only bleach.
It'll die.
All corals start as little
larvae that get
swept around by currents before
attaching
in a single spot.
So, Gringley, Rogers (ph) and
the Nekton team
use these underwater surveys and
environmental
DNA to see which shallow water
corals can
also live in the mesophotic zone
and maybe
one day use this deeper ocean as
a hideout.
GRETCHEN GOODBODY-GRINGLEY: So
if you have
high levels of genetic diversity
across geographic
range or across depth range,
this would be
indicative of mixing, and so the
larvae are
in fact migrating between zones.
NSIKAN AKPAN: So, from these
teeny-tiny samples,
her team can unlock how
generations of corals
have migrated.
The results will clear up which
coral species
can migrate and which can't.
Conservation scientists in the
future can
use this information to best
protect these
critical critters, maybe by
preserving them
in aquariums or [[physically
transplanting
them from shallow water to the
mesophotic
zone.
MAN: The deep ocean is the most
critical frontier
for humanity, and is also the
least known.
The deep ocean is our beating
heart, and if
you didn't know how healthy your
heart was,
wouldn't you want to know?
NSIKAN AKPAN: Until next time,
I'm Nsikan
Akpan, and this is
"ScienceScope" from the
"PBS NewsHour."
JOHN YANG: Online, you can watch
additional
episodes of "ScienceScope" and
get five important
news stories you might have
missed last week.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
A news update before we go.
Late today, the Justice
Department filed its
brief with a federal appeals
court defending
President Trump's travel ban.
Oral arguments are scheduled for
Tuesday.
And we want to follow up now on
a story we
reported last week.
Last Monday, Jane Ferguson
brought us the
story of Abdul Hamid, an Iraqi
who spent seven
years helping U.S. troops as a
translator.
His plans to bring his family to
the United
States had been dashed by the
immigration
ban.
But the United States government
has changed
its position on his request.
He will now be included in the
exemptions
made for Iraqis on special
immigrant visas
who worked with the U.S.
military.
He hopes to leave Iraq next
week, and he appreciates
the outpouring of support he
received on social
media in response to our story.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": the
actors and director of the new
film "A United
Kingdom."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm John Yang.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.